README.md, before:


# PSCF - Polymer Self-Consistent Field Theory (C++/CUDA)

PSCF is a package of software for solving the Edwards-Helfand
self-consistent field theory (SCFT) of polymer liquids. The version
described here is written primarily in C++, with GPU accelerated code
in CUDA.

## History

This C++/CUDA version of PSCF is intended to supersede an older Fortran 
program of the same name. The older Fortran PSCF program is maintained 
in a separate github.com repository at https://github.com/dmorse/pscf.
This new version currently provides almost all of the capabilities of
the older Fortran program, and several important new capabilities, as
discussed below.

Differences between the C++/CUDA version of PSCF and the older Fortran
version and expected advantages of the new code include:

   - PSCF (C++/CUDA) is an extensible package of several different
     programs designed for use with different geometries, boundary
     conditions, algorithms or hardware, implemented within a common
     framework.

   - PSCF (C++/CUDA) enables simulations of mixtures containing arbitrary
     acyclic branched copolymers, in addition to the linear block
     copolymers and linear homopolymers allowed by the Fortran PSCF code.

   - Adoption of C/C++ as a base language has simplified implementation
     of programs that that use graphical processing units (GPUs).

## Programs

PSCF contains the following set of executable programs:

   - **pscf_fd** : A one-dimensional finite difference program.

   - **pscf_pc**: CPU programs for periodic structures that are periodic
     in 1, 2, or 3 coordinates.

   - **pscf_pg**: GPU accelerated programs for period microstructures in
     1, 2 or 3 dimensions.

Comments:

**psf_fd** : The one-dimensional finite difference program is designed to
treat problems that vary in only one coordinate, in Cartesian, cyndrical
or spherical coordinates. It is useful for treating problems involving 
flat or curved interfaces, as well as cylindrical or spherical copolymer 
micelles. The executable for this program is named pscf_fd. The suffix 
"fd" stands for "finite difference".

**pscf_pc** : The pseudo-spectral CPU programs for periodic microstructures
are closely analogous to the older PSCF Fortran program, and provide similar
capabilties and performance.  Different executable files are used in the
new package to solve 1, 2 and 3 dimensionally periodic structures, which 
are named pscf_pc1, pscf_pc2 and pscf_pc3, respectively. In these names, 
"pc" stands for "periodic CPU".  

**pscf_pg** : The GPU-accelerated pseudo-spectral programs for periodic
structures are based on algorithms similar to those used in the CPU
pseudo-spectral programs, and provide almost identical capabilities.
The GPU accelerated programs for solving 1, 2 and 3 dimensionally periodic
structures are named pscf_pg1, pscf_pg2 and pscf_pg3, respectively, where
"pg" stands for "periodic GPU".

## Features

All PSCF programs are designed to treat an incompressible mixture of
block polymers, homopolymers and small molecule (point-particle) solvent 
species. All polymeric species are treated using the standard Gaussian 
model of a polymer as a continuous random walk.

Features that are common to all of the PSCF programs include:

  - Mixtures of any number of block polymers, homopolymers, and solvent species

  - Arbitrarily complex acyclic branched block polymers, as well as linear block polymers.

  - Canonical, grand-canonical or mixed statistical ensembles -
    users may specify either a volume fraction or a chemical potential
    for each species

  - Efficient simulation of sequences of parameter choices along a path
    in parameter space using extrapolation to compute initial guesses.

  - Efficient Anderson-mixing iteration algorithms

  - Examples of converged solutions and input scripts

  - Thorough user and developer documentation

  - Open source code

Features specific to programs for periodic structures include:

  - Ordered phases with 1, 2 or 3 dimensional periodicity

  - All possible 2D and 3D lattice systems (i.e., orthorhombic, monoclinic,
    etc.).

  - Automatic optimization of unit parameters so so as to minimize
    free energy

  - Imposition of any user-selected space-group symmetry

  - Built-in "database" of all 230 3D space groups and 17 2D plane groups

  - High accuracy pseudo-spectral solution of the modified diffusion
    equation

Features specific to the pscf_pc CPU programs for periodic structures are:

  - Inhomogeneous density constraints (a "mask")

  - External fields

  - Thin polymer films

The "mask" and external field features are used in the pscf_pc programs
to implement simulations of thin films, using a mask to constrain a
polymer material to a slit within a periodic supercell, and external
fields to represent interactions with the top and bottom surface.

## Getting the source code

The PSCF C++/CUDA source code is maintained in the github repository

   <https://github.com/dmorse/pscfpp>.

The source code may be obtained by using a git version control system
client to clone the repository. To do so on a machine with a git client,
enter the command:
```
git clone --recursive https://github.com/dmorse/pscfpp.git
```
Note the use of the --recursive option to the git clone command. This
is necessary to clone several git submodules that are maintained in
separate repositories. This command will create a new directory called
pscfpp/ that contains all of the source code and associated
documentation, including all required git submodules.

## Documentation

PSCF is distributed with source files for an html web manual. A copy
of the documentation of a recent version is available online at

  <https://dmorse.github.io/pscfpp-man>

After cloning the source code, you can use the doxygen documentation
generation program to generate a local copy of this documentation.
To do this, doxygen must be installed on your computer, and the
directory containing the doxygen executable must be in your command
search PATH. To generate documentation:

   - Change directory (cd) to the pscfpp/ root directory

   - Enter "make html"

This should create many html files in the pscfpp/docs/html directory.
To begin reading the documentation, point a browser at the file
pscfpp/docs/html/index.html, which is the main page of the manual.

## Dependencies

The PSCF source code is written using C++ as the primary language, with
CUDA used in some programs for GPU acceleration. PSCF is only provided
in source file format - all programs must be compiled from source.
This package was developed on linux and and Mac OS X operating systems
using standard unix utilities, and is designed to run on these or other
unix-like systems.

To compile and run this or other unix software on Mac OS X, you must
first install the unix command line tools. These tools are provided as
part of the much larger XCode Mac development environment, but can also
be installed separately.

The CPU-based programs within the PSCF package depend on the following
external libraries:

  - Gnu scientific library (GSL)

  - FFTW fast Fourier transform library

The one-dimensional finite difference program pscf_fd requires only GSL,
and not FFTW. The pscf_pc CPU-based programs for spatially periodic
structures require both GSL and FFTW.

The GPU-accelerated pscf_pg programs can only run on a computer with an
appropriate NVIDIA GPU. To compile or run these programs, the system must
also have an NVIDIA CUDA development environment that provides the CUFFT
fast Fourier transform library.

Procedures for installing these dependencies are different for
different operating system environments and different package managers.
Instructions for some common environments are given in the web manual.

## Compiling

Complete directions for compiling and installing PSCF are provided in
section 2 of the html documentation. Short instructions for compiling,
after cloning the git repository and installing all of the required
dependencies, are given below:

   - Add the pscfpp/bin directory to your linux command search PATH
     environment variable.

   - Add the pscfpp/lib/python directory to your PYTHONPATH
     environment variable.

   - cd to the pscfpp/ root directory

   - Run the pscfpp/setup script by entering "./setup" from the pscfpp
     directory, with or without an optional filename argument.
     This script installs default versions of several files that are
     required by the build system. The setup script usually only needs
     to be run once, before compiling for the first time. In a linux
     environment, it is usually sufficient to run the setup script
     without a filename argument.  See the html documentation for
     information about how to invoke this script on a Mac.

   - To compile and install only CPU-based programs in the package
     (excluding GPU-accelerated programs), enter "make all-cpu"

   - To compile all programs, including the GPU-accelerated programs,
     on a machine that has a CUDA development environment install,
     instead enter "make all".

The "make all-cpu" and "make all" commands should install executable
programs in the pscfpp/bin directory.

## Command line usage

PSCF is a package containing several different SCFT programs designed
for different geometries, different algorithms or different hardware.
Executable names (given above) are:

   - pscf_fd : 1D finite-difference program

   - pscf_pcD : CPU based programs for D = 1,2, or 3 dimensional periodic
     structures.

   - pscf_pgD : GPU based programs for D = 1,2, or 3 dimensional periodic
     structures

In the names pscf_pcD and pscf_pgD, D denotes a dimension dimension
of space that can be D = 1, 2, 3. For example, the CPU program for
three-dimensionally periodic microstructures is thus pscf_pc3.

Each of these programs reads a parameter file and a command file. The
parameter file is fixed-format file that contains parameters required
to initialize the program. The command file is a more flexible script
containing a sequence of commands that are read and executed sequentially
to specify a sequence of computational steps. The command file for a
standard SCFT calculation specifies the name of a file that contains
an initial guess for monomer chemical potential fields and names of
files to which final chemical potential and monomer concentration
fields should be written.

The usual command line syntax for invoking any pscf program is:
```
program -e -p param -c command
```
where "program" denotes the name of the program, "param" denotes the
path to a parameter file, and "command" denotes the path to a parameter
file.  For example, one might enter
```
pscf_pc3 -e -p param -c command
```
to run the pscf_pc3 CPU program for three dimensional periodic structures.
The "-e" command line option causes the program to echo the parameter file
to standard output as this file is read, which is generally a good idea.

The above form of the command would write log output to the screen.
Output produced during a computation may also be redirected to a log file
by using the unix ">" standard output redirection operator. For example,
a command of the form
```
program -e -p param -c command > log
```
would redirect output that is written direct the computation to a file
named "log".

## Examples

The directory pscfpp/examples contains a set of examples of simple
calculations. Each example directory contains a parameter file (usually
named "param"), a command file (usually named "command"), and a input
chemical potential field (w field) file.  Top level subdirectories of
pscfpp/examples contain examples for different PSCF programs or
families of closely related programs.

Subdirectory examples/fd subdirectory contains examples for the 1D
finite-difference program pscf_fd. Top level subdirectories of
examples/fd contain examples for planar, cylindrical and spherical
geometries, as indicated by the subdirectory names. One or more
example is given for each geometry.

Subdirectory examples/pc contains examples contains examples the CPU
based pscf_pc programs. Top level subdirectories contain solutions for
a particular type of physical system, e.g., examples/pc/diblock
contains examples for a diblock copolymer melt.  Subdirectories of
examples/pc/diblock contain examples for lamellar, hexagonal, and
BCC structures, among others.

Subdirectory examples/pg contains examples for the pscf_pg programs
for periodic structures.

Each example directory contains a script named "run" that can used to
run the example using the supplied input files and appropriate options.
The simplest way to run an example is to change directory (cd) to the
directory containing the example and enter "./run" from that directory.
Users may also inspect the run file to see the command and options
require to run the program. Most example directories also contain a
script named "clean" that can be run to remove all output files that
are created by running the example.

## License

The C++/CUDA version of PSCF is free, open source software. It is
distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License as (GPL)
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License or (at your option) any later version.  PSCF is distributed
without any warranty, without even the implied warranty of merchantability
or fitness for a particular purpose.  See the LICENSE file or the
<a href=http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>gnu web page</a> for details.

## Support

Development of PSCF is supported by the National Science Foundation
program for Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Development
(CSSI) under Grant No. 2103627.

## Contributors

- David Morse
- Guo Kang Cheong
- Anshul Chawla
- Ryan Collanton
- Ben Magruder
- Kexin Chen

Commit message:

Fixing error in ESTIMATE_W_FROM_C command in System.tpp

README.md, after:


# PSCF - Polymer Self-Consistent Field Theory (C++/CUDA)

PSCF is a package of software for solving the Edwards-Helfand
self-consistent field theory (SCFT) of polymer liquids. The acronym
PSCF stands for "Polymer Self-Consistent Field". The version described 
here is written primarily in C++, with GPU accelerated code in CUDA.

## History

This C++/CUDA version of PSCF is intended to supersede an older Fortran 
program of the same name. The older Fortran PSCF program is maintained 
in a separate github.com repository at https://github.com/dmorse/pscf.
This new version currently provides almost all of the capabilities of
the older Fortran program, and several important new capabilities, as
discussed below.

Differences between the C++/CUDA version of PSCF and the older Fortran
version and expected advantages of the new code include:

   - PSCF (C++/CUDA) is an extensible package of several different
     programs designed for use with different geometries, boundary
     conditions, algorithms or hardware, implemented within a common
     framework.

   - PSCF (C++/CUDA) enables simulations of mixtures containing arbitrary
     acyclic branched copolymers, in addition to the linear block
     copolymers and linear homopolymers allowed by the Fortran PSCF code.

   - Use of graphics processing units (GPUs) to accelerate some programs.

## Programs

PSCF contains the following executable programs and sets of programs:

   - **pscf_fd** : A one-dimensional finite difference program.

   - **pscf_pc**: CPU programs for periodic structures that are periodic
     in 1, 2, or 3 coordinates.

   - **pscf_pg**: GPU accelerated programs for period microstructures in
     1, 2 or 3 dimensions.

Comments:

**psf_fd** : The one-dimensional finite difference program is designed to
treat problems that vary in only one coordinate, in Cartesian, cylindrical
or spherical coordinates. It is useful for treating problems involving 
flat or curved interfaces, as well as cylindrical or spherical copolymer 
micelles. The executable for this program is named pscf_fd. The suffix 
"fd" stands for "finite difference".

**pscf_pc** : The pseudo-spectral CPU programs for periodic microstructures
are closely analogous to the older PSCF Fortran program, and provide similar
capabilties and performance.  Different executable files are used in the
new package to solve 1, 2 and 3 dimensionally periodic structures, which 
are named pscf_pc1, pscf_pc2 and pscf_pc3, respectively. In these names, 
"pc" stands for "periodic CPU".  

**pscf_pg** : The GPU-accelerated pseudo-spectral programs for periodic
structures are based on algorithms similar to those used in the CPU
pseudo-spectral programs, and provide almost identical capabilities.
The GPU accelerated programs for solving 1, 2 and 3 dimensionally periodic
structures are named pscf_pg1, pscf_pg2 and pscf_pg3, respectively, where
"pg" stands for "periodic GPU".

## Features

All PSCF programs are designed to treat an incompressible mixture of
block polymers, homopolymers and small molecule (point-particle) solvent 
species. All polymeric species are treated using the standard Gaussian 
model of a polymer as a continuous random walk.

Features that are common to all of the PSCF programs include:

  - Mixtures of any number of block polymers, homopolymers, and solvent species

  - Arbitrarily complex acyclic branched block polymers, as well as linear block polymers.

  - Canonical, grand-canonical or mixed statistical ensembles -
    users may specify either a volume fraction or a chemical potential
    for each species

  - Efficient simulation of sequences of parameter choices along a path
    in parameter space using extrapolation to compute initial guesses.

  - Efficient Anderson-mixing iteration algorithms

  - Examples of converged solutions and input scripts

  - Thorough user and developer documentation

  - Open source code

Features specific to programs for periodic structures include:

  - Ordered phases with 1, 2 or 3 dimensional periodicity

  - All possible 2D and 3D lattice systems (i.e., orthorhombic, monoclinic,
    etc.).

  - Automatic optimization of unit parameters so so as to minimize
    free energy

  - Imposition of any user-selected space-group symmetry

  - Built-in "database" of all 230 3D space groups and 17 2D plane groups

  - High accuracy pseudo-spectral solution of the modified diffusion
    equation

Features specific to the pscf_pc CPU programs for periodic structures are:

  - Inhomogeneous density constraints (a "mask")

  - External fields

  - Thin polymer films

The "mask" and external field features are used in the pscf_pc programs
to implement simulations of thin films, using a mask to constrain a
polymer material to a slit within a periodic supercell, and external
fields to represent interactions with the top and bottom surface.

## Getting the source code

The PSCF C++/CUDA source code is maintained in the github repository

   <https://github.com/dmorse/pscfpp>.

The source code may be obtained by using a git version control system
client to clone the repository. To do so on a machine with a git client,
enter the command:
```
git clone --recursive https://github.com/dmorse/pscfpp.git
```
Note the use of the --recursive option to the git clone command. This
is necessary to clone several git submodules that are maintained in
separate repositories. This command will create a new directory called
pscfpp/ that contains all of the source code and associated
documentation, including all required git submodules.

We do not recommend that users obtain the source code by simply
downloading a zip or tar file from the PSCF github repository, because 
this file will not contain source code for the other git repositories 
that are automatically downloaded and installed as submodules by the 
above git command.

## Documentation

PSCF is distributed with source files for an html web manual. A copy
of the documentation of a recent version is available online at

  <https://dmorse.github.io/pscfpp-man>

After cloning the source code, you can use the doxygen documentation
generation program to generate a local copy of this documentation.
To do this, doxygen must be installed on your computer, and the
directory containing the doxygen executable must be in your command
search PATH. To generate documentation:

   - Change directory (cd) to the pscfpp/ root directory

   - Enter "make html"

This should create many html files in the pscfpp/docs/html directory.
To begin reading the documentation, point a browser at the file
pscfpp/docs/html/index.html, which is the main page of the manual.

## Dependencies

The PSCF source code is written using C++ as the primary language, with
CUDA used in some programs for GPU acceleration. PSCF is only provided
in source file format - all programs must be compiled from source.
This package was developed on linux and and Mac OS X operating systems
using standard unix utilities, and is designed to run on these or other
unix-like systems.

To compile and run this or other unix software on Mac OS X, you must
first install the unix command line tools. These tools are provided as
part of the much larger XCode Mac development environment, but can also
be installed separately.

The CPU-based programs within the PSCF package depend on the following
external libraries:

  - Gnu scientific library (GSL)

  - FFTW fast Fourier transform library

The one-dimensional finite difference program pscf_fd requires only GSL,
and not FFTW. The pscf_pc CPU-based programs for spatially periodic
structures require both GSL and FFTW.

The GPU-accelerated pscf_pg programs can only run on a computer with an
appropriate NVIDIA GPU. To compile or run these programs, the system must
also have an NVIDIA CUDA development environment that provides the CUFFT
fast Fourier transform library.

Procedures for installing these dependencies are different for
different operating system environments and different package managers.
Instructions for some common environments are given in the web manual.

## Compiling

Complete directions for compiling and installing PSCF are provided in
section 2 of the html documentation. Short instructions for compiling,
after cloning the git repository and installing all of the required
dependencies, are given below:

   - Add the pscfpp/bin directory to your linux command search PATH
     environment variable.

   - Add the pscfpp/lib/python directory to your PYTHONPATH
     environment variable.

   - cd to the pscfpp/ root directory

   - Run the pscfpp/setup script by entering "./setup" from the pscfpp
     directory, with or without an optional filename argument.
     This script installs default versions of several files that are
     required by the build system. The setup script usually only needs
     to be run once, before compiling for the first time. In a linux
     environment, it is usually sufficient to run the setup script
     without a filename argument.  See the html documentation for
     information about how to invoke this script on a Mac.

   - To compile and install only CPU-based programs in the package
     (excluding GPU-accelerated programs), enter "make all-cpu"

   - To compile all programs, including the GPU-accelerated programs,
     on a machine that has a CUDA development environment install,
     instead enter "make all".

The "make all-cpu" and "make all" commands should install executable
programs in the pscfpp/bin directory.

## Command line usage

PSCF is a package containing several different SCFT programs designed
for different geometries, different algorithms or different hardware.
Executable names (given above) are:

   - pscf_fd : 1D finite-difference program

   - pscf_pcD : CPU based programs for D = 1,2, or 3 dimensional periodic
     structures.

   - pscf_pgD : GPU based programs for D = 1,2, or 3 dimensional periodic
     structures

In the names pscf_pcD and pscf_pgD, D denotes a dimension dimension
of space that can be D = 1, 2, 3. For example, the CPU program for
three-dimensionally periodic microstructures is thus pscf_pc3.

Each of these programs reads a parameter file and a command file. The
parameter file is fixed-format file that contains parameters required
to initialize the program. The command file is a more flexible script
containing a sequence of commands that are read and executed sequentially
to specify a sequence of computational steps. The command file for a
standard SCFT calculation specifies the name of a file that contains
an initial guess for monomer chemical potential fields and names of
files to which final chemical potential and monomer concentration
fields should be written.

The usual command line syntax for invoking any pscf program is:
```
program -e -p param -c command
```
where "program" denotes the name of the program, "param" denotes the
path to a parameter file, and "command" denotes the path to a parameter
file.  For example, one might enter
```
pscf_pc3 -e -p param -c command
```
to run the pscf_pc3 CPU program for three dimensional periodic structures.
The "-e" command line option causes the program to echo the parameter file
to standard output as this file is read, which is generally a good idea.

The above form of the command would write log output to the screen.
Output produced during a computation may also be redirected to a log file
by using the unix ">" standard output redirection operator. For example,
a command of the form
```
program -e -p param -c command > log
```
would redirect output that is written direct the computation to a file
named "log".

## Examples

The directory pscfpp/examples contains a set of examples of simple
calculations. Each example directory contains a parameter file (usually
named "param"), a command file (usually named "command"), and a input
chemical potential field (w field) file.  Top level subdirectories of
pscfpp/examples contain examples for different PSCF programs or
families of closely related programs.

Subdirectory examples/fd subdirectory contains examples for the 1D
finite-difference program pscf_fd. Top level subdirectories of
examples/fd contain examples for planar, cylindrical and spherical
geometries, as indicated by the subdirectory names. One or more
example is given for each geometry.

Subdirectory examples/pc contains examples contains examples the CPU
based pscf_pc programs. Top level subdirectories contain solutions for
a particular type of physical system, e.g., examples/pc/diblock
contains examples for a diblock copolymer melt.  Subdirectories of
examples/pc/diblock contain examples for lamellar, hexagonal, and
BCC structures, among others.

Subdirectory examples/pg contains examples for the pscf_pg programs
for periodic structures.

Each example directory contains a script named "run" that can used to
run the example using the supplied input files and appropriate options.
The simplest way to run an example is to change directory (cd) to the
directory containing the example and enter "./run" from that directory.
Users may also inspect the run file to see the command and options
require to run the program. Most example directories also contain a
script named "clean" that can be run to remove all output files that
are created by running the example.

## License

The C++/CUDA version of PSCF is free, open source software. It is
distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License as (GPL)
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License or (at your option) any later version.  PSCF is distributed
without any warranty, without even the implied warranty of merchantability
or fitness for a particular purpose.  See the LICENSE file or the
<a href=http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>gnu web page</a> for details.

## Support

Development of PSCF is supported by the National Science Foundation
program for Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Development
(CSSI) under Grant No. 2103627.

## Contributors

- David Morse
- Guo Kang Cheong
- Anshul Chawla
- Ryan Collanton
- Ben Magruder
- Kexin Chen
